docs: adds channel background customization guide (#1361)
GetStream/stream-chat-react-native: docusaurus/docs/reactnative/guides/channel_background_customization.mdx

---
id: channel-background-customization
sidebar_position: 13
title: Channel Background Customization
---

## Basic Custom Background

> You can change the background statically by wrapping `MessageList` and `MessageInput` by using the `ImageBackground` component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can change the background statically by wrapping `MessageList` and `MessageInput` using the `ImageBackground` component.
```

  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1551506448-074afa034c05?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MTEzfHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',
  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1553114835-6f7674d3c2c0?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MTMyfHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',
  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1553075712-453f7213c24f?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MTMzfHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',
  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1551917951-148edcd8ea8d?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MTU3fHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',
  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1553969923-bbf0cac2666b?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MjA3fHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',
  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1553194642-29b272a173b9?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MTcwfHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',
  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1553356084-58ef4a67b2a7?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MTcxfHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',

>   'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1553526777-5ffa3b3248d8?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MTk4fHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',

Reviewer: Should we add some attribution to the images we use? Not required with unsplash, but probably a nice thing to do for the photographers

].map(imageUri => ({
  imageUri,
}));

const styles = StyleSheet.create({
  container: {
    flexDirection: 'row',
    flex: 1,
    alignContent: 'stretch',
    flexWrap: 'wrap',
    padding: 6,
  },
  image: {
    flex: 1,
    width: '100%',
  },
});
```

:::note

> Be aware of the fact that channel preferences was implemented with MMKV, a key-value storage framework.
> There are alternative approaches to achieve the same goal, for example by saving the channel preferences as [custom data](https://getstream.io/chat/docs/javascript/channel_update/?language=javascript) on Stream's channel object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be aware of the fact that channel preferences were implemented with MMKV, a key-value storage framework.
There are alternative approaches to achieving the same goal, such as saving the channel preferences as [custom data](https://getstream.io/chat/docs/javascript/channel_update/?language=javascript) on Stream's channel object.
```

---
id: channel-background-customization
sidebar_position: 13
title: Channel Background Customization
---

You can implement this customization in your existing app or create a new one by running the following

```shell

> npx react-native init MyApp --template stream-chat-react-native-template

Reviewer 2: This template is not actively maintained by us. So I am a bit sceptical about recommending this. In my view, we can avoid this section. People would normally follow installing steps first fo through the tutorial and come to this guide when they want some customisation.

Reviewer 3: Agree on this one!!

Reviewer 3: Someone reading this section already has an app running on his machine ... either his own app or from tutorial

Reviewer: Welllll, it's maintained by me 😅

```

## Basic Custom Background

> You can change the background statically by simply wrapping `MessageList` and `MessageInput` by using the `ImageBackground` component.

Reviewer 2: That's a nice reference @madsroskar, I am completely unaware of it

<img
  src='https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25864161/167857632-c0bc9d67-0a84-4cf5-9d75-305e3bcd1f3d.png'
  width='320px'
/>

Also make sure you adjust the `theme` correctly.

```tsx
import { Channel, MessageInput, MessageList, ThemeProvider } from 'stream-chat-react-native';
import { ImageBackground } from 'react-native';

const IMAGE_URI =
  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1549125764-91425ca48850?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8NjF8fHxlbnwwfHx8fA%3D%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60';

const ChannelScreen = ({ channel }) => (

>   <ThemeProvider style={theme}>

Reviewer 2: where does the `theme` come from? we could add a small example theme for a bit more clarity

Author: from line 47, I've moved to the top, so it'll be more clear

    </td>
    <td align='center' width='50%'>
      <img src='https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25864161/168006193-8fd4ad85-7553-4956-a7c6-5d6979e15ee4.png' />
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr></tr>
  <tr>
    <td align='center'>
      <strong>Chat screen with customize background button</strong>
    </td>
    <td align='center'>
      <strong>Wallpaper overview screen with background image options</strong>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

### Store and manage channel preferences

To persist the channel preferences (at the moment, only the URI of the selected background), we will need to store some data.
We will do it by using `react-native-mmkv`, a key-value storage [framework](https://github.com/mrousavy/react-native-mmkv#mmkv).

Follow the [installation steps](https://github.com/mrousavy/react-native-mmkv#installation), and let's get started, shall we?

We will start by creating our `ChannelBackgroundView` component.
This component will be in charge of rendering the custom background by retrieving it from our key-value store.
We save an object to a key-value store to be scalable and future-proof.

> You'd might want to add other preferences later, such as dimming value, background color, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You'd want to add other preferences later, such as dimming value, background colour, etc.
```

> To persist the channel preferences (at the moment, only the URI of the selected background), we will need to store some data.
> We will do it by using `react-native-mmkv`, a key-value storage [framework](https://github.com/mrousavy/react-native-mmkv#mmkv).
> 
> Follow the [installation steps](https://github.com/mrousavy/react-native-mmkv#installation), and let's get started, shall we?
> 
> We will start by creating our `ChannelBackgroundView` component.
> This component will be in charge of rendering the custom background by retrieving it from our key-value store.
> We save an object to a key-value store to be scalable and future-proof.
> You'd might want to add other preferences later, such as dimming value, background color, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To persist the channel preferences (at the moment, only the URI of the selected background), we will need to store some data.
We will do it by using `react-native-mmkv`, a key-value storage [framework](https://github.com/mrousavy/react-native-mmkv#mmkv).

Follow the [installation steps](https://github.com/mrousavy/react-native-mmkv#installation), and let's get started, shall we?

We will start by creating our `ChannelBackgroundView` component.
This component will be in charge of rendering the custom background by retrieving it from our key-value store.
We save an object to a key-value store to be scalable and future-proof.
You might want to add other preferences later, such as dimming value, background color, etc.
```

```tsx
import type { ViewProps } from 'react-native';
import { useMMKVObject } from 'react-native-mmkv';

type ChannelPreferences = {
  imageUri: string;
};

const DEFAULT_BACKGROUND_URI = 'https://i.redd.it/3jfjc53fsyb61.jpg';

const ChannelBackgroundView = ({
  channelId,
  ...props
}: {
  channelId: string;
} & ViewProps) => {
  const [channelPreferences] = useMMKVObject<ChannelPreferences>(channelId);

>   let uri: string | undefined = channelPreferences?.imageUri || DEFAULT_BACKGROUND_URI;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  const uri: string | undefined = channelPreferences?.imageUri || DEFAULT_BACKGROUND_URI;
```

Reviewer: Isn't the `| undefined` unnecessary here? I'd also avoid explicitly typing things as `undefined` and rather use something more explicit like `null`

  return <ImageBackground {...props} source={{ uri }} />;
};
```

We will then use it in our previously built `ChannelScreen`.

> Replace the static `ImageBackground` with `ChannelBackgroundView` and pass the `channelId`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replace the static `ImageBackground` with `ChannelBackgroundView` and pass the `channelId`.
```

  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1553194642-29b272a173b9?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MTcwfHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',
  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1553356084-58ef4a67b2a7?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MTcxfHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',
  'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1553526777-5ffa3b3248d8?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxleHBsb3JlLWZlZWR8MTk4fHx8ZW58MHx8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=800&q=60',
].map(imageUri => ({
  imageUri,
}));

const styles = StyleSheet.create({
  container: {
    flexDirection: 'row',
    flex: 1,
    alignContent: 'stretch',
    flexWrap: 'wrap',
    padding: 6,
  },
  image: {
    flex: 1,
    width: '100%',
  },
});
```

:::note
Be aware of the fact that channel preferences was implemented with MMKV, a key-value storage framework.
There are alternative approaches to achieve the same goal, for example by saving the channel preferences as [custom data](https://getstream.io/chat/docs/javascript/channel_update/?language=javascript) on Stream's channel object.
:::

### Add a configuration button

> We will add now a button that will take the user from the Channel screen to our new WallpaperOverview screen

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will add now a button that will take the user from the Channel screen to our new WallpaperOverview screen.
```

> We will add now a button that will take the user from the Channel screen to our new WallpaperOverview screen

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will now add a button that will take the user from the Channel screen to our new WallpaperOverview screen
```

import { Channel, MessageInput, MessageList, ThemeProvider } from 'stream-chat-react-native';
import { Pressable, Text, StyleSheet } from 'react-native';

const ChannelScreen = ({ channel }) => {
  const { navigate } = useNavigation();
  const handleMenuOnPress = () => navigate('WallpaperOverviewScreen', { channelId: channel?.id });

  return (
    <ThemeProvider style={theme}>
      <Channel channel={channel}>
        <ChannelBackgroundView channelId={channel?.id} style={{ flex: 1 }}>
          <Pressable style={styles.menuButton} onPress={handleMenuOnPress}>
            <Text>🎨</Text>
          </Pressable>
          <MessageList />
          <MessageInput />
        </ChannelBackgroundView>
      </Channel>
    </ThemeProvider>
  );
};

const styles = StyleSheet.create({
  menuButton: {
    position: 'absolute',
    right: 0,
    top: 0,
    backgroundColor: 'rgba(255,87,56,0.65)',
    borderRadius: 36,
    padding: 16,
    margin: 16,
    alignItems: 'center',
    zIndex: 10,
  },
});

export const theme = {
  messageList: {
    container: {
      backgroundColor: 'transparent',
    },
  },
};
```

---

### Optional: Connect all screens by navigation

> If applicable to your use case, add our screens to a Navigation Stack by doing the following.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If applicable to your use case, add our screens to a Navigation Stack by doing the following:
```
